Improving
the Reliability of the
Internet of Things



Navigate the complex challenge of anomaly detection
and reporting, cloud management and over-the-air
updates, for effective problem solving in the field.




Copyright ©2022 Percepio AB. All Rights Reserved.
 Improving
 the reliability of the
 Internet of Things
 Systematic anomaly detection in firmware enables
 improved dependability during operation of IoT
 device fleets. Dr. Johan Kraft, CEO and founder of
 Percepio, explains the benefits.

 Despite the best efforts of developers, embedded and IoT systems are
 usually deployed with bugs remaining in their code. A development
 team introduces an average of 120 bugs per 1,000 lines of code during
 development. Approximately 5 percent, or 6 bugs per 1,000 lines of code,
 typically remain in the shipped software.

                                                                                  When there are thousands of IoT devices
                                                                                  deployed in the field, relying on users to
                                                                                  report problems caused by these bugs is
                                                                                  neither reliable nor scalable. User reports
                                                                                  tend to be vague and unhelpful for problem
                                                                                  solving. When there are millions of devices,
                                                                                  this matters even more.

                                                                                  A system for detecting and reporting bugs
                                                                                  and anomalies should be a key part of your
                                                                                  toolbox. Coupled with software tracing*
                                                                                  and the ability to do quick over-the-air
                                                                                  (OTA) updates, this becomes a powerful
                                                                                  mechanism to improve the quality and
                                                                                  reliability of a wide range of embedded
                                                                                  and IoT systems.


* Software tracing refers to systematic recording of timestamped software events from firmware in an embedded or IoT device. Events can
  be recorded from kernel code, user application code, or both. Used together with a visual trace analyzer tool, such as Percepio Tracealyzer,
  software tracing provides unsurpassed insight into the dynamic behavior of an embedded system.
                                                                                   3


These lingering bugs probably won’t show up immediately, but
                                                                   Developers and
only cause problems under certain circumstances. Otherwise,
they would have been found before the product shipped. While
                                                                   operations staff
an OTA update can solve the problem in the field, developers       need a feedback
and operations staff need a feedback system to identify            system to identify
issues in deployed devices in near real time. This approach        issues in deployed
has long been standard in the development of mobile and
                                                                   devices in near
cloud applications (DevOps) and it has now become viable for
embedded development as well.
                                                                   real time.
The key to discovering — and solving — problems in the field
is a combination of detection tools, software tracing, cloud
management and OTA updates. This is a complex challenge.
Tracing code needs to be as efficient as possible in a system
already constrained in resources. The link to the cloud needs
to be secure and transparent. It also needs to transfer the
right data to help developers identify any problems quickly
and easily. The cloud service should identify which issues are
new and important, and then notify developers of the problem
they need to fix. Once it’s fixed, the updated software must
be distributed to all devices. All of this needs to scale across
millions of devices.

Information flow starts in the error handling code of the IoT
device, such as existing sanity checks and fault exception
handlers. Using a software agent, firmware issues are shared
as alerts to a customer’s cloud account. An alert may include
an error message and any other information relevant to the
specific issue, such as software state variables and hardware
registers. Depending on the severity of the issue, the alert is
either shared directly or after a device restart, once the cloud
connection has been restored.
                                                                                                                                  4




                                                                                              TRACEALYZER
IoT DEVICES
              ALERT / TRACE   IoT GATEWAY                TRACE        CLOUD STORAGE            TRACE


                                                CUSTOMER CLOUD ACCOUNT
                                                PERCEPIO CLOUD ACCOUNT


                              ALERT SIGNATURE                               LIST OF ALERTS
                                                                                                                   A N A LY Z E
                                                                                             NOT                          THE
                                                                                              IF                       ISSUE
                                                                                               I   CA
                                                                                                        TIO
                                                                                                              NS

                                                    OVER-THE-AIR UPDATE                                            DEVELOPER/QA




     Alerts may also include a trace of the                               Alerts from the firmware agent are uploaded
     most recent software events in the device,                           to the customers’ cloud service. This is
     recorded automatically by the agent. The                             configured to store alerts and notify the
     trace provides details of the error and the                          DevAlert monitoring service. DevAlert
     context, making it easier for developers to                          then handles classification, statistics and
     identify the bug.                                                    notifications to the developers. Classification
                                                                          reduces the potentially large stream of alerts
     Encoding efficiency is key. The developers
                                                                          into a managable overview of issues to
     need enough context to identify the real
                                                                          investigate, creating a to-do list that ensures
     problem, but tracing should be done using
                                                                          nothing is missed.
     a minimal amount of memory.
                                                                          This service offers configuration options,
     This is important for two reasons:
                                                                          identifying, for example, the conditions under
        » It reduces the upload time to a fraction                       which notifications should be sent and to
          of a second, and                                                whom. When developers receive notifications
        » It minimizes the cloud-side operational                        about new issues, they can access alerts and
          costs of alert messaging and storage.                           traces to see the problem.

     This encoding efficiency makes it possible                           Privacy is also key here. The software trace
     to use trace technology out in the field, even in                    never needs to leave the customer’s cloud
     small IoT devices, bringing dramatic advantages.                     account. Only an anonymized signature of the
                                                                          alert is required for cloud processing, which
                                                                          can be provided in an external cloud service.
                                                                                                                                 5


This information can be made completely transparent, configurable,
and meaningless on its own. The communication and storage is
provided by the existing capabilities in the developer’s IoT platform,
using best practices for authentication and encryption.

Need to Trace Your IoT Device?
Testing in the lab just isn’t enough. Today’s embedded IoT systems
are complex. To eradicate all software issues you need real time
tracing and alerts to identify bugs in the field as they happen, with
automatic notifications to the developers to speed up resolution.

Such a system has to be scalable, secure and transparent to the
developers. Once in place, it provides immediate awareness on the
very first occurrence of an issue — before many users have been
affected, and lets developers take full advantage of OTA updates to
rapidly improve their product.



ABOUT THE AUTHOR//
                           Dr. Johan Kraft is CEO and founder of Percepio AB. Dr. Kraft is the original
                           developer of Percepio Tracealyzer, a tool for visual trace diagnostics that
                           provides insight into runtime systems to accelerate embedded software
                           development. His applied academic research, in collaboration with industry,
                           focused on embedded software timing analysis. Prior to founding Percepio
                           in 2009, he worked in embedded software development at ABB Robotics.
                           Dr. Kraft holds a PhD in computer science.




                                                         About Percepio
Learn more about how DevAlert
                                                         Percepio is the leading provider of visual trace diagnostics for
cloud service provides immediate                         embedded and IoT software systems in development and in the field.

feedback when something                                  Percepio Tracealyzer combines software tracing with powerful
                                                         visualizations, allowing users to visually spot and analyze issues in
unexpected happens in the software                       software recordings during development and testing.


of deployed IoT devices. Visit                           Percepio DevAlert is a cloud service for monitoring deployed IoT
                                                         devices, combining automatic, real-time error reporting with visual

percepio.com/devalert.                                   trace diagnostics powered by Tracealyzer. Complimentary evaluation
                                                         licenses are available for both products.


                                                         For more information, visit Percepio.com.




                                                         Copyright 2022 Percepio AB. All rights reserved. | info@percepio.com
