5 Tips
for Fast Debugging of
Deployed IoT Devices

How embedded software teams find and resolve
bugs before customers report them




Copyright ©2022 Percepio AB. All Rights Reserved.
5 Tips for
Fast Debugging of
Deployed IoT Devices
No product is entirely bug-free and it’s up to
embedded software development teams to
minimize the impact of anomalous behaviors
in the field.

For IoT devices in particular, with thousands of units in the hands of
creative and unpredictable users, a fast diagnostics, resolution and
update mechanism is key to eliminating bugs before they become
a product recall.

How can you protect the reputation and revenue of your IoT
product line? Consider these five best practices to reduce
operational risks.
                                                                                  3


1. Adopt a “There will be bugs”                                  Research
   methodology
                                                                 shows that
Can embedded software teams deliver bug-free products? No.
                                                                 around
Research shows that there are between 15 to 50 bugs              20 percent
introduced per thousand lines of code and about 5 percent
                                                                 of bugs are
make it through to deployment. With all possible combinations
of application code, operating system, drivers, firmware, open   major defects.
source, network connections and more, these numbers should
come as no surprise. Include the many ways that a user acts
outside your test plans and a bug is almost guaranteed.

While some bugs are harmless, the same research shows
that around 20 percent are major defects. Given a modestly
sized project with 50,000 LOC, there could be as many as
15–50 user-facing anomalies. That poses a significant risk to
customer satisfaction.

It’s not enough to recognize these problems. Steps must be
taken and tools implemented to accelerate the debugging of
deployed devices.




      Ensure your software collects and stores diagnostic information
      on runtime warnings and errors. The application can write
      periodic messages to a circular buffer in RAM and copy them
      to non-volatile memory upon encountering an issue. These
      messages should include specific information about the issue and
      the events leading up to it to assist developer investigations later.
                                                                              4


2. Provide automatic alerts to the
   development team
Collecting diagnostic information is a good first step in reducing your
debugging time. Typically, this information is only accessible by a support
team member working on a ticket or when the user triggers a bug report.
Both cases are too late as the customer is already in the loop.

To minimize the gap between problem occurrence and you knowing about
it, devices should implement a real-time alerting mechanism. Second-hand
data is also prone to gaps and errors in context – customers are rarely
able to articulate useful information about the problem they had. Having
direct access to the diagnostics data eliminates any confusion.




      An automatic alerting mechanism, to send diagnostics
      data from the device to the development team, provides
      vital information about issues within seconds of the first
      occurrence. Rather than wait for a customer support ticket,
      such a mechanism gives you immediate access to real-
      world device diagnostics to speed up problem resolution,
      especially when the root cause may not be obvious from
      the user-facing symptoms.




Once in place, an automatic alerting mechanism also supports system
testing, as developers get instant notifications about issues in their
prototyping and pre-production code.
                                                                        5


3. Monitor key performance metrics
It’s not just about the bugs. With onboard diagnostics and automatic
alerting comes the ability to make better development decisions.
Designed correctly, these mechanisms provide valuable feedback about
the real-world use of your IoT product.



     Defining custom alert types to capture conditions of
     interest helps you monitor how code behaves in practice
     and discover use cases not considered before.



Maybe you want to measure product performance, such as start-up
time latency and battery life, and send alerts from device to desktop
when the application exceeds thresholds. You could also identify the
features most frequently used by customers to make more informed
decisions on future product improvements.




     Using visual trace diagnostics reveals the context of what
     was happening on the device as the issue occurred and helps
     you understand and reproduce the problem much faster than
     traditional debugging approaches.
                                                                             6


4. Use visual trace diagnostics to
   accelerate fixes
While diagnostic data may contain detailed software traces of
threads, API calls, state changes and interrupts, it’s difficult to scroll
through multiple logs and isolate the root cause of a bug. Analysis
of such information is much faster with visual trace diagnostics,
providing both a visual timeline of events and multiple visual
overviews from different perspectives of the software.




   Using visual trace diagnostics reveals the context of what
   was happening on the device as the issue occurred and helps
   you understand and reproduce the problem much faster than
   traditional debugging approaches.
                                                                        7


5. Deploy over-the-air updates before
customers see problems
Over-the-air (OTA) updates are the new normal. Already in wide use
by most mobile applications, more complex systems are embracing
the ability to improve their features and cybersecurity strength
remotely. The automotive industry projects 120 million vehicles
sold annually with OTA update capabilities and recent FDA guidance
recommends “capabilities that enable device patching and updating
in a timely way.”

OTA updates are invaluable because the sooner a bug is fixed or a
security patch released, the fewer customers are negatively affected.




   Continuous IoT device monitoring provides immediate
   awareness and detailed diagnostics to enable more effective
   OTA updates. By using visual trace diagnostics to identify
   and solve problems faster, you can update devices in the field
   more quickly.
                                                                                                                                8



Conclusion
Following these five steps helps you get the detailed information
necessary to reduce deployment and maintenance risks for IoT devices.
By closing the loop between an anomaly occurring in the field and a
developer delivering a fix, embedded software teams achieve a more
efficient continuous software improvement process.

Percepio DevAlert provides IoT device monitoring for use
in system testing, field testing and deployment. DevAlert
notifies developers about abnormal conditions detected in
the device software, with visual trace diagnostics to speed
up resolution.




ABOUT THE AUTHOR//
                          Dr. Johan Kraft is CEO and founder of Percepio AB. Dr. Kraft is the original
                          developer of Percepio Tracealyzer, a tool for visual trace diagnostics that
                          provides insight into runtime systems to accelerate embedded software
                          development. His applied academic research, in collaboration with industry,
                          focused on embedded software timing analysis. Prior to founding Percepio
                          in 2009, he worked in embedded software development at ABB Robotics.
                          Dr. Kraft holds a PhD in computer science.




                                                        About Percepio

Request                                                 Percepio is the leading provider of visual trace diagnostics for
                                                        embedded and IoT software systems in development and in the field.


an evaluation                                           Percepio Tracealyzer combines software tracing with powerful
                                                        visualizations, allowing users to visually spot and analyze issues in
                                                        software recordings during development and testing.

of Percepio                                             Percepio DevAlert is a cloud service for monitoring deployed IoT
                                                        devices, combining automatic, real-time error reporting with visual

DevAlert here.                                          trace diagnostics powered by Tracealyzer. Complimentary evaluation
                                                        licenses are available for both products.


                                                        For more information, visit Percepio.com.




                                                        Copyright 2022 Percepio AB. All rights reserved. | info@percepio.com
